So far we have seen two versions
of the Dijkstra Algorithm.
Both these versions assume that the edge
weights provided by the network
must be used as is.
Now that can lead to some
interesting problems.
We saw one such problem before.
Remember we were trying to decide
whether we should go from G to D or
from F to E because both options
had the same total weight?
Now had we chosen to go from G to D,
it would take us a few extra steps
to arrive at correct solution.
One way of handling this problem
is to use additional knowledge.
So intuitively, we want to say that
we know that we want to go to B.
So traversing through
D is not a good idea.
Because it will take us away from B.
In other words we use the knowledge
of the destination of B's location
to steer the direction of search.
This variant is called
Goal-Directed Dijkstra Algorithm because
it is using the information about the
target known at any point in the search.
The trick to use this information is to
change the edge weights as we diverse.
How do we change the weight?
We use a formula, where the new weight
is the original weight together with
a function called the potential function.
Now we'll show this in our example.
Since our graph is a proxy for
a road network, we can assume that we
know the coordinates of every node.
Therefore, we can compute
the distance between any two nodes.
In practice, we will choose a few nodes so
that we can compute the distance of every
other node from these chosen nodes.
These chosen nodes are called landmarks.
Let's assume B, which is our target,
is a landmark node, and
let's rewind to the state where
we are trying to choose between
the GD expansion or the FE expansion.
So we calculate the distance of F,
G and E from B.
BF is 20, BG is 80, and BE is 15.
Now we'll apply the formula like this.
For the FG case,
we subtract the BF distance
from the weight and
add the BD distance to the weight.
This gives us 70 because G is far from B.
Similarly for the FE case,
we subtract the BF distance and
add the BE distance to the weight and
it gives us 15.
Now, with these modified weights
we choose the FE expansion.
In practice this significantly improves
the actual performance of the algorithm.
So, this technique is used by many online
mapping services when they give you
directions.